Hi everybody, welcome to the data science hangout. I guess welcome back because we weren't
here last year or last week for the 4th of July. But I'm Rachel Dempsey. I lead customer
marketing at Posit and Posit's the open source data science company building tools for the
individual team and enterprise. So thank you so much for hanging out with us today.
This hangout is our open space to hear what's going on in the world of data across different
industries and to get to connect with others who are facing similar things as you. And
we get together here every Thursday at the same time, same place as long as it's not
a holiday. But if you're watching this as a recording in the future on YouTube, and
you want to join us live, there'll be details to add it to your own calendar below. And
I just always want to add, make sure it adds for 12 to 1 Eastern time so that you can join
us live. I know a few people had some issues with it on their calendar. And so if you need
to re add it, you can go to the data science hangout site as part of the Posit website
too. I know people really love connecting with other attendees here. So if you are interested
in connecting with others, I'll encourage you to say hi in the chat, maybe share your
LinkedIn or introduce yourself or your base something you do for fun. But we're all dedicated
to keeping this a friendly and welcoming space, the welcoming space that you all have made
it and love hearing from you no matter your years of experience, titles, industry or the
languages that you work into. I'll tell you if this is your first time, there's a few
ways that you can jump in and ask questions or provide your own perspective. But it's
also okay if you just want to listen in here to or chat with people in the zoom chat. But
you can raise your hand on zoom and I can call on you to jump in. You can put questions
in the zoom chat and just put a little asterisk or star next to it if you want me to read
it. Maybe you're in a coffee shop or something. And then third, we have a slider link where
you can ask questions anonymously too. For people who join the hangout weekly, you've
heard me say all this way too much now. But thank you again for for joining us. I'm so
excited to be joined by my co host today, Adam Hussein, SVP of data and analytics at
Firebird music. And Adam, to get us started here, I'd love to have you introduce yourself
and share a little bit about your role, but also something you do for fun outside of work
too.
Sure. So my role, I had all data and analytics and cloud technology for Firebird. And I something
I do for fun is I am a classically trained pianist. I play piano sometimes. And, you
know, when I have three young kids, so when they're not all trying to call on top of me
and play the piano with me at the same time.
Awesome. There are a lot of musicians in this hangout group too. And so you'll probably
see lots of guitars in the background of people's video too. But if you do play an
instrument, I'll encourage you to share that in the chat here too. Um, but I guess to get
us started in sharing a little bit about the ways that you're using data to help artists,
could you share a few example use cases with us?
Sure. So, um, so let me give a little bit of an overview of Firebird just for people
who may not be familiar.
Yeah, that'd be great.
We're a pretty new company and, um, you know, we are about two and a half years old now
coming up on three years in October. And the, um, you know, the company is small and growing.
So we're, you know, just over around 40 people right now. And, uh, what we are is we're kind
of partnering with a lot of different companies, um, either as an investor or as an affiliate
or, um, music management is one of our primary areas. So that's like red light management,
which is the largest management company out there. And so we have also worked with, uh,
we work with Mick Management and Jet Management and a few other management companies. So Firebird
is actually the largest artist manager at scale. We also, um, have invested in and partner
with independent labels like Defected Records and, um, Transgressive Records. We've helped
the like Transgressive Records. If you guys, uh, fans may have seen that they just recently
opened up a new U.S. division. That's a lot of like, uh, the work we've been doing with
them. And so, um, so that's primarily our, uh, our spaces. We've also recently gotten
to the live event space too, and invested in a particular festival that we're working
with. I don't know if that's publicly disclosed yet, so I won't name the name, but, um, you
know, it may be coming out in a press release later, but the, uh, you know, the main thing
is that, you know, across the music ecosystem, there's labels, there's management, there's
also publishing companies. And we're, um, we have a couple of those too, uh, like One
Too Many and, um, and Tape Room, which is the, uh, Ashley Gorley's publishing company
where, um, you know, they have like over 40 number one country hits. Uh, that new one,
um, Post Malone's, uh, country single that's at the top of the charts, like Ashley Gorley
was the writer on that one. And so, um, so, you know, we've, we're touching all the different
spaces there between managing the artists, uh, you know, independent music, publishing,
as well as, uh, independent labels. And our goal really is to create a cohesive ecosystem
for the artists where, you know, they can kind of be in one place and we can have incentives
to work with them. The canonical problem I always talk about with people is, you know,
you'll go to your record label, like your Universal or your Warner to create your album
and you might have a multi-album deal there. You'll put out the album and then you'll go
on tour to promote the album and you'll have a promoter like the Live Nation or maybe a
smaller promoter or a series of promoters and your manager and your agent will work
together with them to really coordinate your tour. And you'll start your tour, let's say
your album comes out in April, start your tour in May and it'll be June and you'll be
midway through your tour and the label will say, all right, I think the, the album's pretty
much done the number of streams we're looking for it to do. We're going to pull back on
our marketing spend now, but you've got dates in your tour through August or September.
And now you're like, but I was depending upon all that promotion of the album to help promote
my tour. And the economics for the music industry really shifted over the last 30 years. And
so now the artist is making most of their money from the tour and not that much from
their recorded music. So you can think about it really clearly in the nineties when we
used to buy albums, they would cost 15 to $20 for an album. You'd get, you know, eight
to 12 songs, sometimes 16, if you're lucky. And, you know, like you were paying a fixed
cost of getting something back. Now you pay $11 a month for Spotify and you get unlimited
music and you get to listen to as many songs as you want. So the economics are very different
now for an artist than they used to be. Right. If you, when we were buying physical albums,
they made a lot more money off of that, but now we, we are in streaming. And so we have
a similar problem to the, the issue that we have with the film and TV industry too, which
is that the economics aren't quite there in the same way for them. It's really about
a linear TV is the issue they're having. And so, so because of that, the economics have
shifted in music. People are making a lot of their money from the road, but artists
also make money from brand deals and partnerships and a lot of other stuff. And this is why
music management is our largest investment is because it's core to our thesis of we want
to partner with the artist and then make money when the artist makes money so that our incentives
are aligned with the artist. And that goes back into what we're doing in data science
analytics here is really our goal is to help the artists connect with their fans, grow
more fans, deepen their relationships with their fans, and then build a longer lasting,
more profitable and more impactful career. Thank you for the background there on, on
fiber. That's really helpful. So when you, when you say like, help them build their,
their fan base, like what's a way that you can use data to help them do that? Yeah. So
a lot of what we're doing is we're taking things that I used to do when I was head of
data science analytics for Warner Brothers and really moving that to scaling that out
for hundreds and thousands of artists is the goal. And, you know, the kind of thing that
we do in large companies like Fortune 100 companies is we build like a 360 degree view
of the customer. You connect all the customer's data. You can think of each of these artists
as kind of like a small business. You know, we work with everyone from you know, like
Sabrina Carpenter or, you know, like the biggest acts like Lainey Wilson all the way or Maggie
Rogers all the way down to like people you may not have heard of like cutworms, for example,
who are, you know, just up and coming right now. And so our goal is really to build scalable
data products and solutions. And we're using the Posit Stack for a lot of this in order
to connect the data for the artists so that they can, we can connect their email to the
Shopify and all their other things together for the unified view of the customer and build
scalable interactive tools that their teams can use. So their management teams, the people
working with them day to day can use in order to, in order to help grow and manage their
business and make strategic decisions the same way a large company would, but without
having to invest the millions of dollars in data teams that large companies would.
So I mean, looking at your LinkedIn and chatting with you, Adam, you've worked at some really
cool companies from some of the largest video game publishers, Warner Brothers, and now
Firebird. And I was just wondering, like, is this you following and what you're passionate
about?
Yeah, for sure. I've been really lucky throughout my career to be able to work in a lot of areas
where I'm really passionate. So, you know, I kind of joke that I've kind of completed
the entertainment industry bingo card, that video games, I've got film and TV, and streaming.
And now I have, and now I have music.
Do you have any advice for some of us who are maybe thinking about like going the direction
a company that we're passionate about, but maybe don't yet have the industry experience there?
Yeah, I would say we're really fortunate as data professionals that industry experience
isn't always the most important thing when it comes to data careers. Because, you know,
you can use a lot of the same techniques in different industries and they apply. The other
thing is sometimes it's actually a benefit and some hiring managers and some interviews,
you can convey that this is a benefit because you can also bring an outside perspective,
because oftentimes you just hire people in the industry, they're going to look at the data
the same way, they're going to apply the same algorithms and say, oh, I use this type of
regression on this problem at this other company, so I'm going to do it here. Whereas, you know,
someone coming in new from a different industry or different perspective might really take a
broader view and come up with a different way of doing things, which could be new and innovative.
Thank you. I see a few questions coming in the chat here. And Arsenis, do you want to go first
here? Yeah, sure. Thanks very much. And thank you for joining us. I really appreciate it.
My question was really simple, just on the on the music side. So data science has been used
in for marketing in a lot of different ways, especially in changing landscapes,
like the one you described. But I'm curious about how data science, if at all,
has been used to maybe develop content, say, for example, on determining, you know, the chords or
the tempo for a particular song or anything like that. Wondering if you've had experience with
anything like that, that you could speak to? Yeah, I mean, on our side, we're really working
on the business side of things, right, helping them optimize their businesses. You know, it's
the same philosophy I had at Warner Brothers, which is that we can help you evaluate like the
market potential for your content, but we don't want to be in the business of telling people
but we don't want to be in the business of telling creatives how to create.
Got it. I think there was a question earlier from Bolivar as well. And I think this might
be a question to everybody here. So people feel free to weigh in in the chat as well. But
do you want to jump in? Hello. I guess it's just a general question of, you said,
you know, some of those attributes from like coming from other industries might be, you know,
well received, but kind of just in the job market now, and there's a lot of things to
or requirements to meet. And how do you, you know, I guess leverage or see people that are
coming from academia, where it's more like open source are and not necessarily some of the fancy
cutting edge technologies that other data industries use? Well, I wouldn't sell our short.
I mean, I use. Yes. I don't think that's not cutting edge. There's still like new versions
being pushed all the time, like a couple of times a year and, you know, new packages and thousands
of libraries. And in fact, when it comes to data stuff, oftentimes you find that other languages
like Python are emulating things that are does like with pandas, for example, emulating our
data frames and, you know, matplotlib emulating ggplot. So I would, I wouldn't sell yourself
short or sell your academic experience short. I do think that the transition from academia to
industry is a bit of a rocky one for some people. Some people find it really easy and seamless. Some
people find it a bit more turbulent. And I think the main thing to focus on, right, is in business,
it's really, it moves at a bit of a faster pace, and it's a little bit more of focused on the
business outcomes, rather than in academia, it's about, you know, creating something novel and new.
Right. And so the, you know, it's important to adapt a little bit there and make sure that you're
focused on what is the overall goal of the business? How does the business make money? Or
how does it can new customers? Or what are our targets? And then how does the work that you do
focus on improving that? And then if you do that, you'll be very successful.
Thank you. Thank you. Yeah. Thank you. I see Alan has a question. You want to jump in here?
Yeah, sure. Hi, Adam. I'm curious, I'd like to hear more about, like, what kinds of decisions
do you see getting made differently? Or in a more informed way by like, I don't know if it's an
artist or their team? Can you give some examples of like, what do you what gets shaped by the data
that you provide in terms of like, what they go out and do how they change their, you know, their
strategy about a release or a tour or whatever? Yeah, that's a great question. I would say,
first of all, we're still new. I've been here less than a year. And I really started hiring for the
team about six months ago. So the, you know, we spent a lot of time in the beginning, building
the data warehouse and signing deals to buy data from a lot of providers. And so we've just started
putting tools in people's hands in the last couple months. I think the main things we've seen so far
that people are doing is, for example, on ecommerce, they're using it to make decisions
about product strategy and what kinds of products to create. We're also getting a lot of questions
that we're building tools to help solve and which will be solved in, you know, in a period of time
over the next few months. So for example, you know, inventory management is very difficult,
because, you know, these guys aren't supply chain experts, and they shouldn't need to be
supply chain experts. And so, so giving them automated inventory views, you know, low stock
alerts, you know, estimates for days on hand of inventory, things like that, in an automated
fashion, which they don't have, and they don't, you know, most of these merch companies that they
partner with, for selling the merch are also small companies that do a few million dollars a year in
revenue. So they're not huge, and they're not used to doing like supply chain analytics either.
And so their idea of analytics is typically like, hey, I produced a royalty statement, and there's
a report, I told you, like how much stuff we sold. And, you know, so it's, you know, entry level. And
that's helpful, I don't want to disparage that it's definitely something you need. But there's
more room to improve upon that. And so I think that's where we are right now is we're starting
to deploy all the stuff that are probably best practices in a lot of other industries.
And then they'll be making the same kinds of decisions and improvements that these other
industries would on, you know, how much stock to order, what sizes for t shirts to have.
There's also interesting nuances too, because for example, they travel around right on tour and do
2030 40 stops on a tour, they have to take merchandise with them. Well, how much merchandise
do you take with you as a question that we get right? Or, you know, I spoke with one artist
manager, who had a band who did a killer first tour, and they were so excited, they got to the
end of the tour. And then they said, you know, well, where's all the money we made on the tour?
And he pointed at the, you know, 15,000 t shirts they had over there and said, that's all your
profits from the tour, the merch company overordered everything. And so, so we got to sell
through all this stuff. And so it's really a fascinating business, because, you know, they're
all operating, all these artists operate like small businesses. And but without all of the
support and the resources that you would typically have, if we were in like Silicon Valley, and they
were starting a business in tech, or down here in LA and Silicon Beach, right? There's a lot of,
if you're in tech, right, there's a lot of different services you can use. But also, you're not running
so many different lines of business. Whereas here, they have a lot of different lines of business,
right? They have recorded music, they have merchandise, they have touring, they have publishing,
they have consumer products, right, and partnerships. And so they're running a lot
of different lines of business, oftentimes, the staff of between two to four people.
And so, um, so our goal is to help them make these kinds of decisions that I think
would be probably things that those of you who work in other industries would be like,
oh, yeah, we're already putting together data to do that, but do it in a scalable way,
so that the hundreds of people that support these artists across our portfolio can use these tools.
And we don't have to have, you know, pick up the phone and call a data scientist every time you
need to record or something, you know? That's really cool. That rounds out like my
understanding of what you're doing a bunch. And it's really, really interesting, sort of creating
an ecosystem of these data services that connect in a bunch of places to where these artists and
their teams work. That's really neat. Thanks. Yeah, of course. And we're doing it all on
with shiny apps. For those of you who like shiny apps.
I love it. It's awesome. I mean, it's cool to hear like all these different lines of business,
it's like each artist is running their own startup. And I was wondering, like, what are a
few recent lessons for you learned and in going from a huge company like Warner Brothers to a
startup? Yeah, it's definitely been an interesting experience. I've always had a bit of a kind of a
romanticism about going to a startup. And so, you know, I spent most of my career working at
fortune 500 or fortune 100 companies. And so the so I think it's definitely there's a lot more
focus on, you know, putting things out as fast as possible. Because there's, you know, there's
constantly more scrutiny because of board meetings and things like that. There's more visibility and
a 40 person company on the work everybody is doing. And so that's really important to think
about. And then the other thing is the, you know, the, the ability to get things done is sometimes
easier and sometimes harder. So sometimes it's easier because, you know, there's less bureaucracy,
and there's, you know, less people to talk to and stakeholders to solicit, it's like, oh, you want to
go do this thing, great. If it's valuable, just go do it. But at the same time, you know, you're
also resource constrained, right? So it forces you to think really creatively. Whereas in Warner
Brothers, you know, I had a P&L and a budget and you know, I, you know, operate within the confines
of that and come up with a bunch of ways of doing things. Now it's like, okay, I have a much smaller
amount of budget, a much smaller team to work with. So how do we accomplish something similar
with like 110th or 150th the, you know, the resources. And so that's forced me to think
really creatively. And it's been really interesting to do that.
Thank you. Junaid, I see you have your hand raised. You want to jump in here next?
Yeah. So hi, Adam. One question. So let's say if the songs of the artists are on different
platforms, Apple Music and Spotify, do you, do you get that data from their distribution
platforms that how the songs are doing on those platforms?
Good question. So if they do the recorded music with us, so we have a division called
Vibrant Label Services that supports artists. So we just put out, for example, Slash's new album,
Orgy of the Damned. And we put out a number of other albums through this division.
If they were putting their music out directly through us, we use a company called Fuga to
distribute that music. And then Fuga gets the raw feeds from Spotify, Apple Music, everybody else,
and they share that back with us. If the music's going out through like a Warner or Universal or
someone like that, they don't tend to share the data with us, although I'm, I'm asking.
But typically the major labels like to keep that data to themselves, is my understanding.
But the, so we do get some data back, but it's really, the reason why we get that data back
and that the DSPs, or what they're called, the direct streaming platforms, the reason why they
share that back is, and I see Edgar's comment, yes, Guns N' Roses Slash, that is correct.
The guy with the big tall hat. So yeah, so the, the reason why this data is shared back is really
for royalty calculations, because we have to pay out the royalties on the songs. And so that's the
reason why this data is shared back. But the good news is that over time, people have added additional
data to it, based on customer requests, mostly from the major labels. So for example, our Spotify
data could just come back with, here's the number of streams for each song per day, and maybe a user
ID, so you can validate that, you know, like there's no fraud going on. But instead, it also
comes back with like, here's the source of the stream. And here's the, like the demographics,
you know, like an age and gender bin, like is this person is male, and he's 18 to 24. And you know,
he's listening in Los Angeles, right? And so, so we do get some additional data like that.
The flip side of that is every platform is doing it differently, and every data feed is different.
So, and there's dozens of platforms globally. And so the, there's very little uniformity in the data
other than the number of streams per day for royalty calculations. Got it. So one follow up
question. So you're managing international artists as well? Oh, yeah. Yeah, Defected and
Transgressive are based in the UK. And then all music we do gets distributed globally, typically.
So unless it's something where we're only doing it for a specific territory, like a distribution
deal of some sort, which we have a division called Graduation that does that. So, so they do it for
like Russ or Diddy or other folks, where they'll do the international distribution for them and
the their label would do the US. Unless it's something like that, normally, we do things
globally. Got it. Thank you. Rui, Chen, I see you had a question in the chat. Do you want to go next?
Yeah, sure. Thanks again, Adam, for joining us on this talk. This has been super interesting so far.
So I'm very, very curious about the challenges that you have encountered, given your long history
in the entertainment industry. So you've provided examples that streaming kind of changed how
artists make their money. And with these changes, I would imagine that it would yield new data
challenges. What challenges did these, you know, disruptors present in your line of work? And how
did your team adapt to these changes? You've already mentioned that, you know, just given the
fast pace of the industry that you guys have to be nimble. Do you have any tips and tricks that
you have implemented in your teams that you would like to share with all of us? Sure. So I think
this is a few questions combined. So let's go through it one at a time. So I think we want a few
challenges. Then we want some tips and tricks. Is that a good way to summarize it? Yep. Okay. So
challenges, I mean, definitely across all of entertainment, there are challenges. I think music,
live events is making up for a lot of the revenue. And there's some great projections, Goldman Sachs
has an annual report called Music in the Air, which if you search with perplexity, perplexity
can find it pretty well. If you Google it, you may not find it. But perplexity is good at finding,
you know, obscure PDFs that you can't find otherwise. And this is not a paid endorsement
from perplexity. So these kinds of research reports clearly show that the music industry
is growing really quickly, which is good. But there are challenges and headwinds still, right?
So for example, you know, the transition to streaming was a bit rocky. And then you, if you've
paid attention to the news, Universal, Warner Music, a few others have been going through and
doing some layoffs. Same with the larger like film and TV entertainment companies where I used
to work, right? Or where some other folks on the call like Junaid work. And so, you know,
it's really, there's a bit of a shift in power over time between the companies that own the
content and the means of distribution. So, and then tech platforms, right? And so the platforms
are really the ones that are in more control and have more data. And so I think the challenge for
companies that are not the platforms now over time is really going to be figuring out how do you
either build your own platforms, which some of the folks in film and TV are doing in the streaming
space, for example. And that way you can own the platform, you can monetize it, and you can
have access to all of the data. Or if you're like Firebird, or you're an independent producer,
or a production company in film and TV, you know, how do you get access to enough data that you can
then make strategic decisions and collect that together in a way that, you know, you can cost
effectively figure out what is the audience I'm building this for, who are my fans, how do I reach
people, how do I grow my business, right? Without necessarily being, you know, solely reliant on
things like traditional market research, right? Or, you know, there's tools like Demographics Pro
that people in the industry will use, which are largely modeled, right? And for a lot of you on
the call who, you know, work in this kind of stuff, as we know, the problem with modeling things based
on demographics is, you know, the interests tend to cut across demographic lines, right? So I was
used to saying Warner Brothers, you know, Batman fans are 8 to 80, you know? So you can have, you
know, it cuts across lines, you know? And so it's the same thing with music. You know, I'll talk to
people who are, you know, in their 20s and they'll be like, I love Lionel Richie, he's one of our artists,
and, you know, I love Lionel Richie and, you know, his last big songs came out in like the 80s, right?
Or I'll talk to people who are 65 and who are like, oh man, you know, you have Lionel Richie, we love
Lionel Richie, right? And then tips and tricks, I would say, you know, it's important depending on
the type of company you're at to think creatively about the types of data you use. I find that
there's a little bit of a curse of data sometimes, where the bigger your internal data, the more
likely you are to only look at your data for answers. And there's really a wealth of data out
there that you can use for augmenting your internal data and helping you build models and make
decisions. And I would say that, you know, I spent a lot of time early on on Kaggle and, you know,
that's really where I thought a lot about, you know, there were these competitions with external data.
And, you know, it really taught me to think creatively about what other data could you bring
to solve these problems. And whereas, you know, like when I would work in companies, I was like,
oh no, we have the Call of Duty data. We know everything everybody did on our platform.
Why do we need additional data? And I'm like, well, we had a 20% drop in users and nothing
changed in our game. And another competitive game came out. We should probably be seeing,
you know, instead of assuming that it just came from that competitive game, getting additional
data to see, you know, how many people are playing that game versus they're doing other things,
right? And so it's really important to think about that as an important tip or trick, as you
will, to maybe a little bit more than a trick, but really a philosophy to think about how you apply
data science in whatever industry you're in, right, is to think about the source of your data
and think about creatively, are there ways you can augment that data with other data sets from the
outside? I remember Adam once brought SafeGraphs data to understand the mobility to solve
problems in the studio, so I second him. Yes, Junaid was full disclaimer. Junaid was on my
team a few years ago at Warner Brothers. I was just going to say, it seems like you both know
each other. I mean, I love when there's something that so many people can relate to, like music,
there's so many awesome questions coming in. George, you had asked a question a little bit
earlier about when things don't meet your expectations. Do you want to jump in?
And I can read it if you want to add context, feel free. But it's, what are some examples of when
results of your analysis went against the expectations of the artist? How do artists
and or their management react to data that goes against their assumptions?
That's a great question. I would say that that's not just in music, that's everywhere,
where, you know, when you think about it, sometimes as data professionals, we are the
bearer of bad news. And sometimes we're the bearer of something unexpected, which could be really
exciting. And so it's a double-edged sword, right? I think the, you know, where something didn't go
their way, right, or something wasn't what they're expecting, I would say in music, people are pretty
positive. Like, you know, it's not that difficult to produce new music. You're not spending hundreds
of millions of dollars on it, like a film. I would say it was a lot tougher in film and TV.
Like, if you're working on a marketing campaign for a film where we've already spent $150 million,
we're spending $50 million to market this film, and like, no one is showing any interest in seeing
this film. But it's, those are tough conversations to have, where you have to go, like, I'm sorry,
I know that we're really optimistic about this movie, but the numbers clearly indicate that,
you know, we are way behind on presales, from where we should be. We want this to open to $100
billion. And, you know, those are tough conversations to have. I will say that
it's one of those things where I have learned that different people respond to that information in
different ways, and you have to be attuned to that type of person, and understand what type of person
you're communicating with. Some people, you know, they're very receptive, and they're open. And with
those people, it's good to share additional context, and, you know, make sure they understand
why other people, they shut down, become very defensive, and feel like you're attacking them.
And so if it's that kind of person, you have to be very careful when sharing negative information.
Don't only share positive information, that's a mistake. But you may need to, like, couch it in
softer terms, and make sure that you, you know, give something that seems more like a balanced
perspective. Don't just give all negative news. Say, look, you know, there are some positives
here, but there's also some negatives you should pay attention to. And then that might be more
well received by someone who has a penchant for, for being more standoffish or defensive when they
hear negative news. Thank you. Stephen, you had a question about earlier that touched on, like,
artists who want to do their own analytics. Do you want to jump in?
I see you unmuted. We can't. Yes. Okay, there. Yeah, thanks. Thanks for coming back to that. I
mean, Adam mostly covered it in a previous answer. But, you know, there are some, a few artists
out there who are, you know, have part of their name is that they're famous for their independence
or their, you know, their sort of, like, hands-on approach. And so I'm curious if there's ever been
anybody like that, especially I could imagine maybe an artist that, you know,
works on computers anyways, might have a really, just a interest in analytics and whatnot. Are
there those, have you encountered those kind of people? And if so, you know, sort of, how do you
work with them? And I'm also curious too, about, you've described the, the ways in which you, you
know, create reports for people, but how do you also educate them in understanding these things?
Because some of these are maybe complex ideas that you're trying to, you know, you're trying to
because some of these are maybe complex ideas that can always be boiled down to like a univariate
statistic or something like that. Yeah, for sure. So, so for the first one, I would say that
typically we have a, we work with artist managers directly, not the artists as much. The artist
managers, we have an affiliate program where sometimes, you know, if they don't want to go
join a bigger company or something, they can affiliate Firebird. And that's typically how
we work with them. The, you know, there are online platforms like, you know, that just do
TikTok distribution or that do like a music distribution to the different streaming platforms.
And so sometimes some of those provide analytics for you. So the tech savvy folks can use things
like CD Baby, which is also owned by Fuga or other platforms to distribute their music and then get
raw data back through that or some sort of form of their data. It might be slightly
aggregated and a helpful view. And then, sorry, the second part of the question was.
It was basically saying, you know, I do a lot of, in my work, I do a lot of education related to,
you know, data. So, so how, how do you explain these things to people without having to take
up all your time, you know? Yeah. So I would say that it's a combination of when we roll out
the tools to people, we kind of walk them through how they work and educate them a little bit. And
we always answer questions or do follow-ups and that's helpful. You know, I have a neuroscience
background from my time at UC San Diego. And so one of the most important things we learn in
neuroscience is, you know, that the repetition really breeds learning. And so, you know,
you want to strengthen those neural connections between the different areas. And so it's important
to have follow-ups and touch bases and make sure that people are finding it useful.
And then reinforcing those concepts and tying things together is another way that, you know,
really helps with learning. You know, if you have one concept, you understand you tie things to that
concept. You know, there's a concept of like a neural attractor, but basically like you can think
of it as if you tie things to other concepts, it makes it easier to remember because it's part of
something that you already know. And so that helps. And then in the tools themselves, we had
little tool tips and things like that. Sometimes with question marks, Rebecca, my team does a great
job at this. And so I'm putting these in places you can mouse over and it explains to you, this
is the definition of this metric or, you know, in context. And so that way, if you're like, oh, what
does this like first time purchaser index really mean? You can mouse over and say, oh, it's like
this divided by this gives you this index. And it's like, cool. You know what I mean?
That makes perfect sense. Thank you. Yeah.
Thank you. So one of the artists who likely does their own analysis, Mike Smith here, I see you
had a question on the models that are used. Do you want to jump in?
I'm the very worst kind of musical data scientist because I never looked at my statistics. I can
count the number of streams and plays on one hand. But the question I had for Adam was more
you're clearly making predictions and recommendations based on patterns of, you know,
what has happened before and such. But, you know, as I imagine that occasionally you get
big events like, you know, Taylor Swift announces her Eras tour or Coldplay drop a new album,
which seem, you know, has potential to disrupt large parts of supply chain
merch, you know, production, vinyl pressing and so on. So do your models allow for those
kinds of big events happening? Yeah. So our label service team
does all the we have Scott Bergman, who is the VP of physical over there, who does all the like
vinyls and everything like for Slash's album that I mentioned and, you know, a few others.
And so, you know, we've discussed this a little bit. I think the issue there is that
the release schedules for these things aren't announced that far in advance.
And so it's difficult to do that. We've talked about building a predictive model
to predict kind of, you know, there's some seasonal trends, but there's also like just
a lot of variation, right? I mean, you can think of it like a bite to eat eye model,
right? For lifetime value for those who've done lifetime value modeling, you know, it's kind of
like there's a like a distribution that you can figure out of how often artists are releasing
albums. Some people release really often and it's like clockwork and some people it's like,
hey, it's been six years, maybe there's an album coming out, you know? And so I think that's
probably how I would model it if we do go down that route. But we're definitely not at the point
of that yet. We're still very far away. We're still doing basic stuff like, you know, lifetime
value modeling for e-commerce and things like that, which, you know, are table stakes in other
industries, but stuff that, you know, is new to this industry. I mean, I guess it would be a wee
bit more like the insurance industry or reinsurance, you know, betting against hurricanes or something
like that, right? For example, we've just had an enormous hurricane blowing through the Caribbean
in the last couple of weeks, but that's the earliest that there's been a hurricane of that
magnitude. So that would be an unusual thing to happen, right? And so, you know, if you're then
predicting how much should we have available for reinsurance, then suddenly something
weird has happened and it's big. And so do you then bank on that happening more regularly, or
do you just go, well, that's a freak occurrence? Yeah. Do you just remove it from the models now,
Lair, or do you include it in the probabilities now that there's a non-zero probability in the
future of it happening at this time of year? Did we just refer to Taylor Swift as a hurricane?
I didn't say anything of the sort. We are all Taylor Swift fans on this call.
This is recorded. We don't want anyone to think otherwise.
I am, but I see Will, your hand's raised, want to jump in?
Yeah. At my own work, I've been thinking a lot about data quality lately, and I'm just curious
to know, like, what are some of the messiest or least reliable data sources you have right now,
and maybe what you're doing to mitigate those problems?
So definitely the streaming data is messy because it comes in a lot of different formats,
and, you know, there's not much of an incentive for the DSPs to really clean a lot of that up and
make it easy to drive insights from it. And so, in talking to other people, I find that, you know,
some of the larger labels, they tend to just, like, archive it and use it for reporting because
of that and not even do any modeling off of it. Maybe they are doing modeling, and I just haven't
found the right people to tell me they're doing modeling, but for now, all I've heard is that
they're basically just archiving it and doing basic recording off of it, and that's fine.
Because, you know, the amount of time and investment it takes is difficult,
but we are investing that time and effort. I would say the other thing is when you get data
from different data providers, like third parties that you license data from, it can come in various
forms, and so sometimes you can get really clean, easy-to-use data that, you know, you just run a
query on and it just works. I would love to meet those providers because most of mine, there's
still work we have to do with modeling the data, cleaning it up, enhancing it, augmenting it,
like you get an album and it's like, who's the artist that is this album actually being released
or a song? You know, it's just a list of artists. It's like, who is the one that actually was the
primary artist on this track? Well, we have to figure that out now, or it's, you know, like
with other data sources on concert ticket sales, it's like, great, here's the name of the event
and on the secondary market, and, you know, apparently on the secondary market, whoever's
plugging the events on Subhub or VividSeats, one of those platforms, decided to put Death Cab
Ampersand Postal Service on one, Death Cab A&E Postal Service on another one, Capitalize on some,
lowercase on others, Slash on some in between Death Cab and Postal Service. So, and then,
you know, there's festivals and all sorts of stuff, and so there's lots of data cleaning
and enhancement that's needed on a lot of different data sources. I would say that
the data cleaning and enhancement seems to be one of the barriers that a lot of people have
had in the music industry, from what I've been learning. We are investing that time and effort,
and, you know, we are using AI to help with some of that too, but, you know, it's definitely
something where I feel like the scale of the data, because it's so big, like just on our scale alone,
you know, we're at the hundreds of millions of streamers just from our catalog, and from
these extracts and billions of rows of streams, and we are not big by any means, shape, or form.
So, you can imagine the trillions or maybe quadrillions of streams that the Warner Music
and the Universal Music of the World probably have in their data lakes, right? And then you
can imagine how Herculean and Metastase may probably think it is to clean all that up.
So, I think we're fortunate that we're starting at a smaller scale and building this infrastructure
when we're smaller, and then we're building it so we can scale as the company grows.
I see. Michelle asked a question that is starting a great conversation in the thread
there, which I haven't had a chance to read through, but it's,
how do you approach developing and maturing new data science or analytics teams?
Our team wants to expand capabilities to more complex data projects,
but we don't really have an experienced data science member to mentor us.
Oh, that's really interesting. Well, I would say, first of all, that, you know,
we've done a few different things on different teams I've been in before. So, it's not just,
sometimes you don't have a more experienced member to mentor you. Sometimes,
that if you have a more experienced person, but they might have projects assigned to them and
be busy, and you want to grow other people on the team into this discipline, then that can be
another reason why. It's not just because you don't have so much experience, but we've done
a few different things. So, we've enrolled people in courses before, and then we've done a few
programs before. You know, here in LA, there's like Masters in Applied Statistics program.
There's other programs that are really good. There's also the, there's also a lot of online
courses and materials. So, a lot of folks on my team have done like Coursera type stuff before.
There's, you know, AI is really good too. Like, ChatGPT has a good understanding of these things,
the algorithms. I think it's important always to make sure that you understand how the algorithms
work, though, when you're using them, and that you take the time and invest in understanding how
it works, and not just making it a black box where, hey, I ran the code and I got an output.
Because, you know, it's very easy to make mistakes that way, and to use the right algorithm on the
wrong problem, or use the wrong algorithm on the right problem. And, you know, those are both
different types of mistakes that are easy to make in data science if you're not careful. You know,
you need to frame the problem correctly, and you need to understand what is the right algorithm to
use to correctly model that problem. And so, I think it's really important that we
educate team members through a variety of different sources. But I would say that,
you know, if you don't have the ability to send people to longer term things, like, you know,
some sort of, you know, advanced degree program, or some sort of certification,
then Coursera is great. Also, you know, I would say leverage ChatGPT and the latest AI,
you know, the paid solutions are quite good to give you some insight. And then the most
important thing is giving people a concrete project they can work on. Because if you have
team members who are naturally curious and interested, you know, the human capacity for
learning is great. We spend our whole lives learning, our brain is constantly changing,
despite what some people may say. You know, like, our brains are constantly tuning and
changing the different networks that we have, they're pruning connections, they're enhancing
connections. And so I think the most important thing is, you know, have an open learning mindset.
And then if you give people a problem, and they have this mindset, you give them some space to
actually do the research, you know, read papers or read materials online. And make sure that you're
just you're checking the assumptions. That's a really important thing. There's sometimes I'll
hear things about like, oh, well, there's an article that said to do it this way. So that's
the way I did it. And it's great as a starting point, but always make sure that when you have
people learning things, especially that you're checking the assumptions. And it's like, okay,
well, why did the article say to do it this way? Are there other ways we should consider doing it,
but giving them the space to really experiment. You know, the way we learn is not always by
rote material, right? I think there's, you know, auditory and visual learning is very important.
But at the same time, you know, we've learned for millions of years as human beings,
by experimentation with things, right? We, you know, like, we saw spots moving in the bushes
together, and we learned that those spots were a cheetah, right? And so our visual centers slowly
tuned to be aware of like, when things move together, that's a pattern, we should be aware
of that. Or we, you know, like would hit things together and be like, oh, this, it's this,
we can open up this coconut, and now we can eat it. This is great. You know, and the modern version
of that is, hey, I can run an algorithm in Python or R, and oh, look, it makes this thing,
and I can look at it, and I can make a graph of it. And this is wonderful. And then now I can do
something else with this, right? And so encouraging that natural experimentation, and that natural
curiosity is a great way to get your team members to learn new things.
I love that. Thank you. I see in the thread that someone had mentioned, I remember Posit
has a program for teaching teams about R, and Isabella shared Academy. So I just wanted to
make sure I share that there's this event happening next week, on July 17th, with three teams who are
going through and sharing their experience using Posit Academy for real world applications of
open source and public health. And I just wanted to make sure I shared that here in the chat with
you all. I see Azuka had asked a question a little bit earlier that was, how much does charting
position on charts like Billboard or music review pages like Pitchfork factor into your analysis?
Do you also consider independent music reviewers as well? So Billboard is actually calculated as
a function of the number of streams and album sales. So it's not necessarily like the Hot 100,
for example, it's not necessarily reviews, they do review albums as part of Billboard,
the magazine. And so the reviews themselves, we don't really pay that much attention to because
we're not doing the creative side of things. But the rankings like the Hot 100, or the Billboard
200, we do pay attention to, because those are reflective of streaming and sales numbers.
And those are important both as inputs and outputs in different types of models.
Thank you. I'm trying to make sure I get to as many questions as possible here. I just want to
make sure there weren't some that I missed earlier. Mehdi, I see you had two questions.
I wanted to make sure I give you an opportunity to ask one of them. You may have dropped,
but I think the question was more so, Adam, about learning what your typical day at work looks like.
It's a lot of meetings. Unfortunately, what I found through my career is the more senior you
get, the more meetings you have. So that is unfortunately a sad fact of life. I do try to
block out here at Firebird, you know, Warner Brothers, I try to block out Wednesday afternoons
between like three to seven for individual coding time. You know, I really value the ability to be
hands-on and code and build models or apps or things like that. And so it's definitely something
I value. And here at Firebird, I do that about three days a week, which is really nice. So I get
about like 10 to 12 hours of individual contributor time. Sometimes there's a stack of emails that
eat into that time, unfortunately, or like the last minute meeting or something.
But typically my day will start off about, you know, between 7.30 or 8.30 in the morning.
We have people in the UK and people on the East Coast in Firebird. And so we have a lot of morning
meetings with them. And then over time, you know, I'll shift into more one-on-ones or project-focused
meetings. I will try and schedule a couple of breaks in my day, just because if I don't schedule
them, then I won't have any breaks. And I'll be working nonstop until about two or three o'clock
when the East Coast folks go offline. And then after that, you know, I'll take a break for lunch
or something. And then I'll typically come back and try and do individual contributor coding.
You know, there's a lot of good studies that show that your energy tends to, you know, be multimodal.
You have like a peak in the morning and it tends to tend downwards. And then after lunch, you have
another peak and then, you know, tends downward after that. And so, and for those of you who
follow like Andrew Huberman, he talks about ultradian cycles. And yes, there are these
ultradian cycles. I encourage everybody to, you know, try and leverage those. And so I try and
time my day around my ultradian cycles if I can. And so, hence the timing of my lunch is a little
bit later in the day than most people would have. And then, you know, I get a peak of energy
after lunch where I can hopefully get through some machine learning or some modeling of some sort.
Thank you for sharing that. Yeah. Okay. I know we have a few minutes left for questions. So I'll ask
the Posit team behind the scenes to help gather the ones that we've missed. But I know, Nitesh,
you had asked a question in the chat a little bit earlier. Want to jump in now?
And I can start by reading it if you want to jump in. Oh, you unmuted. There you go.
Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. So I just wanted to learn if you have any interesting data fact
from the music industry over the course of your time there, like something the rest of us wouldn't
even think about or like know. Like the one I had in mind was something like which city listens to
the most music on the planet. But you can choose anything you want. That one, I could probably
look that up. But I actually haven't checked that one. That's an interesting thought, though.
We probably have that data in our database, at least from Spotify. Spotify publishes the top 50
cities for every artist. No, I think the most interesting things are really, you know, there's
a lot of stuff about like, like one hit wonders or like people who, you know, they have their first
album is a hit. And, you know, they have multiple hits on it. And it actually tends to be a minority
of artists. What's really interesting is that, you know, it's about like one third of artists roughly
have a hit in their first year of their career. And, you know, and what's interesting is we now
see self releases too, because people can self publish. So that number goes down when you include
self releases more than like one eighth. Rebecca on my team, who I see on the call here, she is
doing all that great analysis. And the, you know, there's also a great paper from Sanford published
by this gentleman, Berg, in 2022 on music careers, which I encourage everyone who's interested in the
stuff to look at, which has a lot of these great stats in it. We're just replicating his work right
now. And so, so I'd say that was really interesting. And then the other thing that we've noticed is
that, you know, there's more and more artists looking at like the hot 100 data, you know,
talked about, that's one of the things we look at more and more artists having hits on the hot 100
further on into their careers than ever before. And so, you know, you can look at like, Billy
Joel had a top 100 hit last year when he released his new album, right. And, you know, he's like 50
years into his career at this point, still having hit songs. And I'd say that's a really interesting
thing to think about, both from like a consumer perspective, and as a fan, as well as like a
business perspective. Because, you know, artists are having longer lasting careers, which is part
of our goal at Firebird. But it also means that, you know, there's only so much time and so much
space to listen to music. And there's platforms have made a lot easier to release music. And then
on top of that, you know, it's also easier for artists to have communication and relationships
with their fans. Now in this new era, right, you have social media, you have email, right? Imagine
trying to release an album, if you were like, I don't know, someone from the 1930s, like Perry
Como, you know, the 1970s or 80s, right? You know, like every music label would be like, no, I'm sorry,
you're past your prime, we're onto this new hot young thing. You know, Bon Jovi is where it's at,
like, I don't know why Perry Como wants to do an album, right? Whereas now they can see like, oh,
man, there's like 30 million people a month streaming, you know, Billy Joel, like, I bet a
ton of people listen to a new song from him. Yes, we as Sony Music will definitely do a new song
with him. Because one of the things we never got to see before, which now we can see, which is
really interesting. So we get to see through the streaming platforms, how much you listen to
music that's not new, it's not frontline. It's called catalog, you know, music that's 18 months
or older, and catalog is actually the majority of streaming, which is a really fascinating
statistic. It's not something that people outside the industry really know. But you know, if you look
at the top 1000 artists, actually, there's a ton of artists who have been deceased for sometimes
decades, who are in the top 1000 artists on streaming, because people love the music and
keep listening to it. And so, so it's really interesting that, you know, those are some
interesting facts that, you know, it's really, artists are, you know, not necessarily having hits
at their beginning of their career, that's not as common. So the common story in the news and
the narrative, but there's actually the less common case. And then the artists having hits
longer and to their career, sometimes as long as 50 years or later after their first hit. And then
on top of that, you know, a lot of listening is actually for catalog, and for, you know, like
older music. And that's what a lot of people listen to all the time is they listen to their
favorites, which, you know, we wouldn't know, but now we know because of streaming.
That's really cool. Thank you. Actually, you just saying this made me think of a question I
probably should have prepared beforehand. But I recently listened to this, like, Randy Travis
song was like an AI song that hit the Billboard country charts, and he had health issues. So they
used AI to make this song with his voice. And I was just curious, like you just mentioned some
of the top artists actually being deceased. Like, what do you think is to come in that
space? And what are your thoughts about that? I guess that's a huge question.
Yeah, you don't have to give us like a long thing, but just that's okay. I asked that with
three minutes left. So I think there's a huge potential for disruption. But I don't think it's
some people think it's gonna be bigger than, bigger than it actually will be. Because we as
human beings tend to be ingrained in the way of doing things. And you know, we continue to follow
some of the same patterns. I think there's going to be new and novel use cases, like the Randy
Travis thing might be a good one. And so there may be ways that people think about using this.
But I also think that we as humans also have some like, ethical things. So I don't know, like,
you know, we'll be doing like Marvin Gaye's estate, we'll be doing new songs by Marvin
Gaye. I don't know if that would happen. Maybe it will, you know, I don't know, I could be wrong.
But I think that, you know, we as human beings may, may find that a little bit like, icky to
have like, songs by people who've been long deceased coming out. But, you know, I could
be wrong. Maybe there'll be a market research study that says that no, actually people love
new songs from deceased artists. Well, okay, one, maybe last question just to end with,
I always like to ask people about their career advice. So is there a piece of career advice
that you've either received over the course of your career, or given someone else that you'd
like to share with us? Yeah, um, I would say the piece of career advice that I often give
is really, and you know, that I've received over the years as well, is really having very
frank and transparent communication with the people you work with. You know, as data professionals,
and people who work in code, it's oftentimes one of those things where we get so enveloped in the
code and the problem that, you know, we're just like super into it. And we don't realize that,
you know, no one else knows what we're doing. And so communication is very important on a lot
of different levels. You know, the frequency of communication and updates, trying to make your
complex topics more understandable for, you know, lay audiences. And then also making sure that you
share the work you're doing with your colleagues and your peers is really important. Because,
you know, oftentimes we work as part of teams and organizations. And it's really important to,
you know, help the teams and organizations grow and collaborate really effectively,
because your work is only as valuable as its usage. And so if you do your work by yourself,
and everyone's on your laptop, and no one else knows how to do it, and you just run it, then,
you know, it's not going to be as useful and as helpful, whereas it becomes part of a production
process. And, you know, it supports a large number of customers, and it continues to scale out.
You know, sometimes we'll feel like, oh, but it was my baby, and I don't want to give it up.
But at the same time, that actually creates more impact and more visibility. I think that's helpful
to people. And it's sometimes a big issue I see with people early on in their careers is
they often feel partial to the things that they did. And they're like, no, no, I don't want to,
like, turn it over to this other team, or I don't want to, like, lose control over it.
And so it's really important to communicate frequently and share the things that you work on,
both from a communication and like a collaboration standpoint.
Absolutely. Thank you so much, Adam. This has been really fun. I really appreciate you taking
the time to join us and share all your experience. No, it's my pleasure.
I forgot to add this in the beginning, but I did just want to remind people about
Posit Conference. And I have a little, like, promo code that I just got made for
all Hangout people to get the early bird price still. And I completely forgot to say that in
the beginning, but it's just DSHangout. So if anyone didn't register yet, feel free to use
that code for the early bird price, too. Thank you all for the awesome questions here today, too.
Have a great rest of the day, everybody.